[MUSIC PLAYING]
We are built out of very small stuff,
and we are embedded in a very large cosmos.
And the fact is that we are not very good at understanding
reality at either of those scales.
And that's because our brains haven't
evolved to understand the world at that scale.
Instead, we're trapped on this very thin slice of perception
right in the middle.
But it gets strange because even at that slice of reality
that we call home, we're not seeing most of the action
that's going on.
So take the colors of our world.
This is light waves, electromagnetic radiation,
that bounces off objects, and it hits specialized receptors
in the back of our eyes.
But we're not seeing all the waves out there.
In fact, what we see is less than a 10 trillionth
of what's out there.
So you have radio waves and microwaves and x-rays
and gamma rays passing through your body right now,
and you're completely unaware of it
because you don't come with the proper biological receptors
for picking it up.
There are thousands of cell phone conversations
passing through you right now, and you're utterly blind to it.
Now, it's not that these things are inherently unseeable.
Snakes include some infrared in their reality,
and honeybees include ultraviolet
in their view of the world.
And of course, we build machines in the dashboards of our cars
to pick up on signals in the radio frequency range,
and we build machines in hospitals
to pick up on the x-ray range.
But you can't sense any of those by yourself,
at least not yet, because you don't come
equipped with the proper sensors.
Now, what this means is that our experience of reality
is constrained by our biology.
And that goes against the common sense notion
that our eyes and our ears and our fingertips
are just picking up the objective reality that's
out there.
Instead, our brains are sampling just a little bit
of the world.
Now, across the animal kingdom, different animals
pick up on different parts of reality.
So in the blind and deaf world of the tick,
the important signals are temperature and butyric acid.
In the world of the black ghost knifefish,
its sensory world is lavishly colored by electrical fields.
And for the echolocating bat, its reality
is constructed out of air compression waves.
That's the slice of their ecosystem
that they can pick up on.
And we have a word for this in science.
It's called the Umwelt, which is the German word
for the surrounding world.
Now, presumably, every animal assumes
that its Umwelt is the entire objective reality out there.
Because why would you ever stop to imagine
that there's something beyond what we can sense?
Instead, what we all do is we accept reality
as it's presented to us.
So let's do a consciousness razor on this.
Imagine that you were a bloodhound dog.
Your whole world is about smelling.
You've got a long snout that has 200 million scent receptors
in it.
And you have wet nostrils that attract and trap
scent molecules.
And your nostrils even have slits
so you can take big nosefuls of air.
Everything is about smell for you.
So one day, you stop in your tracks with a revelation.
You look at your human owner, and you think,
what is it like to have the pitiful, impoverished nose
of a human?
What is it like when you take a feeble little nose full of air?
How can you not know that there's a cat 100 yards away?
Or that your neighbor was on this very spot six hours ago?
So because we're humans, we've never
experienced that world of smell.
So we don't miss it.
Because we are firmly settled into our Umwelt.
But the question is, do we have to be stuck there?
So as a neuroscientist, I'm interested in the way
that technology might expand our Umwelt
and how that's going to change the experience of being human.
So we already know that we can marry our technology
to our biology, because there are hundreds of thousands
of people walking around with artificial hearing
and artificial vision.
So the way this works is you take a microphone
and you digitize a signal, and you put an electrode strip
directly into the inner ear.
Or with the retinal implant, you take a camera
and you digitize the signal.
Then you plug an electrode grid directly into the optic nerve.
And as recently as 15 years ago, there
were a lot of scientists who thought these technologies
wouldn't work.
Why?
It's because these technologies speak the language of Silicon
Valley, and it's not exactly the same dialect
as our natural biological sense organs.
But the fact is that it works.
The brain figures out how to use the signals just fine.
Now, how do we understand that?
Well, here's the big secret.
Your brain is not hearing or seeing any of this.
Your brain is locked in a vault of silence
and darkness inside your skull.
All it ever sees are electrochemical signals
that come in along different data cables,
and this is all it has to work with and nothing more.
Now, amazingly, the brain is really
good at taking in these signals and extracting patterns
and assigning meaning so that it takes this inner cosmos
and puts together a story of this, your subjective world.
But here's the key point.
Your brain doesn't know and it doesn't care
where it gets the data from.
Whatever information comes in, it just
figures out what to do with it.
And this is a very efficient kind of machine.
It's essentially a general purpose computing device,
and it just takes in everything and figures out
what it's going to do with it.
And that, I think, frees up mother nature
to tinker around with different sorts of input channels.
So I call this the pH model of evolution.
And I don't want to get too technical here,
but pH stands for potato head.
And I use this name to emphasize that all these sensors that we
know and love, like our eyes and our ears and our fingertips,
these are merely peripheral plug and play devices.
You stick them in and you're good to go.
The brain figures out what to do with the data that comes in.
And when you look across the animal kingdom,
you find lots of peripheral devices.
So snakes have heat pits with which to detect infrared.
And the ghost knife fish has electroreceptors.
And the star-nosed mole has this appendage with 22 fingers on it
with which it feels around and constructs
a 3D model of the world.
And many birds have magnetites so that they
can orient to the magnetic field of the planet.
So what this means is that nature doesn't have to continually
redesign the brain.
Instead, with the principles of brain operation established,
all nature has to worry about is designing new peripherals.
So what this means is this.
The lesson that surfaces is that there's
nothing really special or fundamental about the biology
that we come to the table with.
It's just what we have inherited from a complex road of evolution.
But it's not what we have to stick with.
And our best proof of principle of this
comes from what's called sensory substitution.
And that refers to feeding information
into the brain via unusual sensory channels.
And the brain just figures out what to do with it.
Now, that might sound speculative,
but the first paper demonstrating this
was published in the journal Nature in 1969.
So a scientist named Paul Bach-Erida
put blind people in a modified dental chair.
And he set up a video feed.
And he put something in front of the camera.
And then you would feel that poked into your back
with a grid of solenoids.
So if you wiggle a coffee cup in front of the camera,
you're feeling that in your back.
And amazingly, blind people got pretty good
at being able to determine what was in front of the camera
just by feeling it in the small of their back.
Now, there have been many modern incarnations of this.
The sonic glasses take a video feed right in front of you
and turn that into a sonic landscape.
So as things move around and get closer and farther,
it sounds like-- [MAKES SOUNDS]
Sounds like a cacophony.
But after several weeks, blind people
start getting pretty good at understanding
what's in front of them just based on what they're hearing.
And it doesn't have to be through the ears.
This system uses a electro-tactile grid
on the forehead.
So whatever's in front of the video feed,
you're feeling it on your forehead.
Why the forehead?
Because you're not using it for much else.
The most modern incarnation is called the brain port.
And this is a little electrode grid that sits on your tongue.
And the video feed gets turned into these little
electro-tactile signals.
And blind people get so good at using this
that they can throw a ball into a basket,
or they can navigate complex obstacle courses.
They can come to see through their tongue.
Now, that sounds completely insane, right?
But remember, all vision ever is is electrochemical signals
coursing around in your brain.
Your brain doesn't know where the signals come from.
It just figures out what to do with them.
So my interest in my lab is sensory substitution
for the deaf.
And this is a project I've undertaken
with a graduate student in my lab, Scott Novick, who's
spearheading this for his thesis.
And here's what we wanted to do.
We wanted to make it so that sound from the world
gets converted in some way so that a deaf person can
understand what is being said.
And we wanted to do this given the power and ubiquity
of portable computing.
We wanted to make sure that this would run on cell phones
and tablets.
And also, we wanted to make this a wearable, something
that you could wear under your clothing.
So here's the concept.
So as I'm speaking, my sound is getting
captured by the tablet.
And then it's getting mapped onto a vest that's
covered in vibratory motors, just like the motors
in your cell phone.
So as I'm speaking, the sound is getting
translated to a pattern of vibration on the vest.
Now, this is not just conceptual.
This tablet is transmitting Bluetooth.
And I'm wearing the vest right now.
So as I'm speaking, the sound is getting
translated into dynamic patterns of vibration.
I'm feeling the sonic world around me.
So we've been testing this with deaf people now.
And it turns out that after just a little bit of time,
people can start feeling.
They can start understanding the language of the vest.
So this is Jonathan.
He's 37 years old.
He has a master's degree.
He was born profoundly deaf, which
means that there's a part of his umwelt
that's unavailable to him.
So we had Jonathan train with the vest for four days,
two hours a day.
And here he is on the fifth day.
You.
So Scott says a word.
Jonathan feels it on the vest.
And he writes it on the board.
Where.
Where.
Jonathan's able to translate this complicated pattern
of vibrations into an understanding
of what's being said.
Touch.
Touch.
Now he's not doing this--
[APPLAUSE]
Jonathan's not doing this consciously,
because the patterns are too complicated.
But his brain is starting to unlock
the pattern that allows it to figure out what the data mean.
And our expectation is that after wearing this
for about three months, he will have a direct perceptual
experience of hearing.
In the same way that when a blind person passes a finger
over braille, the meaning comes directly off the page
without any conscious intervention at all.
Now this technology has the potential to be a game changer,
because the only other solution for deafness
is a cochlear implant.
And that requires an invasive surgery.
And this can be built for 40 times cheaper
than a cochlear implant, which opens up this technology
globally, even for the poorest countries.
Now we've been very encouraged by our results
with sensory substitution.
But what we've been thinking a lot about is sensory addition.
How can we use a technology like this
to add a completely new kind of sense
to expand the human Umwelt?
For example, could we feed real time data from the internet
directly into somebody's brain?
And can they develop a direct perceptual experience?
So here's an experiment we're doing in the lab.
A subject is feeling a real time streaming feed
from the net of data for five seconds.
Then two buttons appear, and he has to make a choice.
He doesn't know what's going on.
He makes a choice, and he gets feedback after one second.
Now here's the thing.
The subject has no idea what all the patterns mean,
but we're seeing if he gets better at figuring out
which button to press.
He doesn't know that what we're feeding
is real time data from the stock market,
and he's making buy and sell decisions.
And the feedback is telling him whether he did the right thing
or not.
And what we're seeing is can we expand the human Umwelt
so that he comes to have, after several weeks,
a direct perceptual experience of the economic movements
of the planet?
So we'll report on that later to see how well this goes.
Here's another thing we're doing.
During the talks this morning, we've
been automatically scraping Twitter for the #TED2015
hashtag, and we've been doing an automated sentiment analysis,
which means are people using positive words
or negative words or neutral.
And while this has been going on, I have been feeling this.
And so I'm plugged in to the aggregate emotion
of thousands of people in real time.
And that's a new kind of human experience,
because now I can know how everyone's doing
and how much you're loving this.
[LAUGHTER]
[APPLAUSE]
It's a bigger experience than a human can normally have.
We're also expanding the Umwelt of pilots.
So in this case, the vest is streaming nine different measures
from this quadcopter.
So pitch and yaw and roll and orientation and heading.
And that improves this pilot's ability to fly it.
It's essentially like he's extending his skin up there,
far away.
And that's just the beginning.
What we're envisioning is taking a modern cockpit full of gauges,
and instead of trying to read the whole thing, you feel it.
We live in a world of information now.
And there's a difference between accessing big data
and experiencing it.
So I think there's really no end to the possibilities
on the horizon for human expansion.
Just imagine an astronaut being able to feel
the overall health of the International Space Station,
or for that matter, having you feel the invisible states
of your own health, like your blood sugar
and the state of your microbiome, or having 360 degree vision,
or seeing an infrared or ultraviolet.
So the key is this.
As we move into the future, we're
going to increasingly be able to choose
our own peripheral devices.
We no longer have to wait for Mother Nature's sensory gifts
on her time scales.
But instead, like any good parent,
she's given us the tools that we need to go out and define
our own trajectory.
So the question now is, how do you
want to go out and experience your universe?
Thank you.
[APPLAUSE]
[APPLAUSE]
Can you feel it?
Yeah.
Actually, this is the first time I felt applause on the vest.
It's nice.
It's like a massage.
Twitter's going crazy.
Twitter's going mad.
So that's the stock market experiment.
This could be the first experiment
that kind of secures its funding forever more, right?
If successful.
Well, that's right.
I wouldn't have to write to NIH anymore.
But look, just to be skeptical for a minute,
I mean, this is amazing.
But isn't most of the evidence so far
that sensory substitution works?
Not necessarily that sensory addition works.
I mean, isn't it possible that the blind person can
see through their tongue, because they already
have the visual cortex is still there, ready to process,
and that that is needed as part of it?
That is a great question.
We actually have no idea what the theoretical limits are
of what kind of data the brain can take in.
The general story, though, is that it's
extraordinarily flexible.
So when a person goes blind, what
we used to call their visual cortex gets
taken over by other things-- by touch, by hearing,
by vocabulary.
So what that tells us is that the cortex is
kind of a one-trick pony.
It just runs certain kind of computations on things.
And when we look around at things like Braille, for example,
people are getting information through bumps on their fingers.
So I don't think we have any reason
to think that there's a theoretical limit that we
know the edge of.
If this checks out, you're going to be deluged by--
I mean, there are so many possible applications for this.
Are you ready for this?
What are you most excited about?
Yeah.
Which direction it might go?
I mean, I think there's a lot of applications here
in terms of--
beyond sensory substitution, the things
I started mentioning about astronauts on the space
station, they spend a lot of their time monitoring things.
And they could instead just get what's going on.
Because what this is really good for is multidimensional data.
The key is this-- our visual systems
are good at detecting blobs and edges,
but they're really bad at what our world has become,
which is screens with lots and lots of data.
We have to crawl that with our attentional systems.
So this is a way of just feeling the state of something,
just like the way you know the state of your body
as you're standing around.
So I think heavy machinery, safety,
feeling the state of a factory of your equipment,
that's one place it'll go right away.
David Ekman, that was one mind-blowing talk.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Chris.
[APPLAUSE]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
