Two years ago, I did a video on cybersecurity trends for 2023.
Then last year, I did another one for 2024.
Well, let's dust off the crystal ball and take a look
and see what I'm seeing for 2025 and beyond.
But before we do that, let's take a quick look
at what I predicted last year and see if it came true or not.
That way you can decide whether you want to believe
this YouTube profit or not.
So how did I do on last year's predictions?
The first one was about the adoption of passkeys
over passwords, moving from passwords
to doing this more sophisticated security conscious passkey
technology from Fido.
Passkeys, in fact, we found there was a password management
company that particularly pointed out
that they saw 4.2 million passkeys saved
in their software over the course of the last year.
That's a big improvement, a big uptick.
They found that it was one in three users
are now storing passkeys and hopefully using them as well.
And that in fact, they saw twice as many companies,
in other words, websites, that were accepting
passkeys as an option.
So I would say that's a big improvement.
That one definitely came true.
And I expect to see that one continue even more
as we go forward.
Now, my next prediction had to do with AI phishing.
In other words, using generative AI in order
to generate phishing emails.
We've in fact seen this occur as well.
There was an email security company
that said they are now seeing these perfectly
crafted and legitimate sounding phishing emails that look
better than anything we've seen before.
In fact, these things are highly personalized.
In fact, we could use information
that's available on the web in order
to make them even more personalized and more targeted
and therefore more believable.
And that whole business of looking for grammar errors
and spelling errors in phishing emails,
that's slowly going away because generative AI doesn't
make that mistake.
So we're in fact seeing and have already
seen that AI is improving phishing attacks.
Now we need to do something about the defense as well.
OK, deep fakes.
What's happening in that case?
It turns out almost two months after I recorded last year's
video, there was an attack where a deep fake
was able to emulate and impersonate
the CFO, the Chief Financial Officer, of a company
and convinced an employee to wire $25 million
dollars out of that company into the attacker's account,
all using a deep fake in a video call.
So the employee thought for sure they
were talking to the CFO and therefore following
those instructions.
In fact, it was a deep fake.
It was an AI-generated impersonation
of the actual person.
And they lost $25 million in that particular case.
We also saw another example in the US,
the presidential election run up.
In the early part of 2024, again,
just a few months after I made this prediction
about deep fakes, in the New Hampshire primary,
for the Democratic primary, there
was a deep fake robo call of Joe Biden's voice,
calling people and telling them they didn't
need to vote in the primary.
They could just save their vote for the general election.
So these things have, in fact, occurred.
And they started occurring almost instantly
after I referred to them as a prediction.
How about hallucinations?
So generative AI continues to have some issues
with the truth.
Sometimes it's not well grounded in the truth.
Sometimes it does amazing stuff.
But just to give you an example, I did this one really recently.
A friend of mine who is a runner was quoting to me
what her time was on a run that she did recently.
And she's not from the US, so she quoted me her time
as 545 pace per kilometer.
And I thought, well, I don't think in kilometers,
so I need to convert that into per mile pace.
And so I went to a chat bot, a very popular chat bot,
and asked it, what does that convert to?
545 kilometers, what is that pace in miles
if someone was running it?
And you know what it said?
It said it was a 3.43, which, congratulations to her,
she would have literally broken the world record
by more than 10 seconds if that had been the case.
It wasn't true.
I went to the chat bot and said, that's not right.
That's literally all I said.
And it said, oh, yeah, well, let me correct my numbers.
Actually, that would have come out to a 915 pace per mile.
Well, that's a big difference.
That's not a world record.
That's respectable, not a world record.
So all I did was just prompt it and say, tell me again,
try again, and then all of a sudden it got it right.
So we're still having hallucination problems.
It's getting better, but it's not solved yet.
And then the last prediction I made
had to do with the use of cybersecurity
needing to secure AI.
In other words, companies are going to be deploying AI,
and they're going to be wondering,
how can I use cybersecurity technologies
to make sure those deployments can't be attacked,
that they're robust?
That has, in fact, turned out to be the number one question
I get when I'm out meeting with clients.
This is the reason, for the most part,
they're bringing me in to have conversations.
I talk about a lot of other things,
but this is the number one concern
for all the clients I've seen virtually in the last year.
How am I going to secure my AI deployment?
Now, I think there's also this other part
which I made a prediction about,
and we're seeing this happen also.
And that is, how can we use AI
to do a better job of cybersecurity?
Well, one of the thing is we could use this
to create essentially an online Q&A type chatbot.
So in other words, if we had a chatbot
that didn't hallucinate, that was grounded in the facts,
and we could do that with something like retrieval,
augmented generation, RAG technology, and things like that,
it could do a better job of answering questions
for cybersecurity analysts.
Just go in and ask it questions in natural language
and get responses back.
We're starting to see that technology
make its way to the market.
And another one is cases,
being able to look at incidents and things like that
and be able to track them,
look at all the indicators of compromise,
and give a summarize version of a particular case.
Because one of the things that generative AI is good at
is generating summaries as well.
And those summaries can be helpful
when you need to pass off an incident or a case
to someone else who now is gonna pick up the ball
and run with it.
So overall, I think we did pretty good.
Okay, enough of living in the past, old man.
Let's get rid of those.
And now we're gonna take a look at 2025 and beyond.
I don't know exactly which year
all of these things will happen.
So we're just looking toward the future in general.
And even though they say history repeats itself,
actually Mark Twain said it doesn't repeat itself,
but it often rhymes.
So we're gonna see some of the same trends
that we saw before that will continue
maybe in a little bit different form.
And not surprisingly, AI is gonna be a big part
of everything that happens in technology.
And cybersecurity is no different in that regard.
We're gonna see it give us some pluses
and some minuses, some pros and cons,
some things where it'll help us
and some things where it won't help us.
I'm gonna start with some of the things
where it necessarily will not be helping us.
And that's, first of all, a prediction about shadow AI.
That is, this stuff is so good
and everyone's gonna wanna do it
and everyone is going to do it.
And not all of those AI deployments
will in fact be authorized.
They'll be the ones that are approved by the organization.
So we could have, for instance, in some places
that somebody goes into a cloud instance,
pulls down a model and still starts running away.
And that shadow AI could present a problem
for the organization.
Other examples, on mobile phones.
So people are using AI as being built
into mobile phone operating systems.
And we're gonna see more and more of that.
If that's not handled well,
it could be a source of data leakage.
It could be a source of misinformation.
So this kind of sort of unapproved shadow AI
is gonna represent a particular problem for us.
And I expect to see that grow as we go into the future.
What else?
Deepfakes.
I mentioned that one before and that one's not going away.
In fact, deepfake technology
is only going to be getting better.
And there are gonna be implications to business.
I gave an example of that where an organization
was basically swindled out of or convinced
to send $25 million.
There was another case a few years ago
where $35 million was sent as a result of a deepfake call,
just an audio call.
And someone followed those instructions.
So it's gonna affect business.
It's gonna affect governments.
As someone puts out a deepfake of head of state
or something like that,
then if we don't have reliable sources for that,
people are gonna see those messages
and some portion of the people will believe it
because some portion of the people will believe anything.
So how are we going to make sure
that what we're seeing are in fact the real leaders
and not deepfakes?
And think about law, the legal aspect of this.
We look at evidence and we take those into court,
a video of someone committing a crime.
What if it was a deepfake
and it wasn't really that person committing the crime?
Or by the same token,
what if it was an actual video
and the defense just argues that it's a deepfake
and now that creates some sort of reasonable doubt?
So there're gonna be implications to all of this
and we have not figured out yet.
Our legal system, government systems and so forth
have not figured out what all the implications
of those will be.
The bad guys will continue to use these
in ways that will represent a threat to us.
Another one is exploits and writing malware.
In fact, we know that generative AI is able to write code.
Well, why wouldn't it be able to write malware?
In fact, it can't.
In fact, there was one study that was done
that found that one of the very popular generative AI chatbots
was able to, when given an adequate description
of a zero day vulnerability,
it was able to generate exploit code 80% of the time,
87% of the time.
That's really good.
That means a bad guy doesn't even have to know
how to write code.
They just need to know how to take the information
about the description of the problem,
put it into the right chatbot
and now they get their exploit and they can launch that.
Well, that's a theoretical threat.
Has it actually happened?
In fact, it has already.
We've started to see this already.
One major online retailer that you're all familiar with
has already reported, they've seen a seven fold increase
in the last six months in their attacks,
the number of attacks coming in
and they attribute some large percentage of that.
They believe that that's not a coincidence
that it's gone 7x in the last six months.
They believe generative AI is a big part of that,
that attackers are starting to use this technology
more and more.
That trend, I expect, will continue.
How about the attack surface?
Well, every time we add a new piece of componentry
into a system, it extends the attack surface.
It's one more thing that a bad guy can use to break into.
So the attack surface now includes AI.
So the shadow AI that's out there,
any of these other technologies
could potentially be things that someone will exploit.
So here I was talking more about breaking
into the existing IT infrastructure using generative AI.
In this case, I'm saying the use of AI,
the AI itself will become something that gets attacked.
And if someone's able to poison that,
it's gonna mess up the operations of the business.
They may be able to pull data out of it,
and we have a data loss of some sort.
Another one that's a big concern,
in fact, I've talked about this one before
and done a couple of videos on this topic,
prompt injection.
Generative AI is subject to some of the same failings
that humans have.
That is, it believes a lot of things,
and it can be naive,
and it can be socially engineered, in essence.
And that's what a prompt injection attack does.
We tell it to do things that the originators
of the technology did not intend it to do.
And that way, the bad guys will continue to figure out ways
to get this thing beyond and break out of its guardrails,
to do anything now, as it's been referred to.
And we are gonna need to be able to have better
and better defenses against these kinds of attacks.
Because those, in fact, the OWASP organization,
Open Worldwide Application Security Project,
says this is the number one attack type
against large language models,
which are what the generative AIs are based on.
So we haven't seen a solution to that.
I'm sure we'll see more of it.
What else?
Well, those are a lot of negatives that we have to face.
How about at least one positive in here?
And I mentioned a little bit of this before,
and that is using AI to improve cybersecurity.
How can we do a better job of cyber
now that we have this AI tool?
It's not just an attack surface, it's not just a negative,
but let's leverage that tool as well.
Well, what we've seen a lot so far
is using generative AI in a more passive role,
where it's doing analysis and things like that.
But what if it gets involved a little bit more in response?
Now, maybe it doesn't automate the response.
In fact, I'd be very cautious about doing that
because we still have hallucination problems
and I don't want it hallucinating
what the answer should be to a particular break-in.
But giving advice and saying,
here within the understanding of this AI,
we believe this is the most likely response you should take.
Then here's our confidence in that.
And here's the next most likely thing that you should do
and the next priority thing that you should do.
So giving us that kind of expert advice,
or at least for an expert to look at,
oh, here's a bunch of suggestions,
and now I can decide which ones I wanna do
and which ones I want to discard.
So that's a potential positive use of generative AI
in doing cybersecurity.
And then one thing that's not related to AI,
just so that you know not everything is about AI,
and that is quantum computers, quantum safe cryptography.
Quantum computers are gonna do some amazing stuff,
but one of the things they're gonna do, we wish it didn't,
is it's gonna be able to break our cryptography.
At one point, we don't know when this will be,
maybe five years, maybe 10 years,
could be tomorrow.
Someone is gonna be able to read all the encrypted messages
that we have put out by using a quantum computer
to break that.
Now, quantum computers will do some wonderful things,
that's not one of them,
but we're gonna need to start moving,
and we need to have already started moving
toward these new quantum safe
or post-quantum crypto algorithms,
the ones that will not be susceptible to attack
and vulnerable to quantum attacks.
A lot of people are still sitting in the starting blocks
and have not begun this activity, and they need to,
because of a thing called Harvest Now Decrypt Later.
I make a copy of your data right now,
and then I wait for a quantum computer to get strong enough
and then I can read what your stuff was.
And that could be a problem,
especially if we're talking nation states,
where some of the information will be classified
for generations to come.
So we really need to start working on projects
to convert to this new quantum safe cryptography,
and I expect we will see more organizations realizing that
and starting to do that.
Okay, so those are a few of my predictions
for 2025 and beyond.
And by the way, I've got videos on the IBM Technology Channel
on virtually every one of these topics, including this one.
So go check out those on the IBM Technology Channel
if you wanna see a deeper dive
into each one of these subjects.
But enough about my predictions,
how about your predictions?
What does your crystal ball show you?
Go ahead and put in the comments section
what your predictions are
so that we can all benefit from your wisdom.
(static)
(static)
